a few years ago we got this crazy idea to
build a bedroom for each of the kids
after a few decisions about what type of
building method both alternative and
traditional, we decided on the one that was
the most abundant to us
Dirt
all of us kids have
gotten an earth bag bedroom except for
Shae
[music]
we started this six, seven years ago
we
decided we were just gonna build a
bedroom for each of the kids and off we
went
starting off with a Bree with great
aspirations
oh yeah
we were going to bang these out like boom boom boom boom
Mommy
did you catch that on video?
what?
He took the saw and he was trying to cut it and he went, zzzzzzzzzz
to the dirt bags
Bree's room, she was interested
in a drum space
that's were my bed goes
that's going to be my closet
that's going to be my drum area
then you got different
financial things - we run out of
bags and we don't know where to buy the
bag
there's just different stresses that
happen through the years that were
putting these together
each one got a
little bit more elaborate
well, you know grrr grrr grrr
each one had its own style, its own
purpose, its own theme
each one was
designed by the kids
and then Garen had this a castle look
and then we
experimented with his exterior a little
bit
we were into the paper bags on
Garen's room
it's kind of like the hula hoop, we go
through these little stages I guess
Bryson, at one time, was really into the
stars and that's why he had that patio
to put the telescope on
not everything's all hunky-dory and roses
right
I mean there's stresses and
time commitments
there were times when some of us had to be away
this stuff is really cool
I'm helping you out Dad
thanks Honey
you don't think about the time that you're
gonna be spending with the kids, working
side-by-side and you get to see them in
stressful situations and happy
situations and all of - the whole
gamut and it helps you as a parent to
be able to address some of the issues
that come up and help the kids through
things and they helped us probably more than we help them
that we need to be patient and it
turned out to be just a really
wonderful experience and more than just
building buildings don't you think?
oh absolutely
Sometimes it was
more, what do I do here
I know that this
should look like that
the kids and everybody's working on it
do I leave it or do I go back and change it
and usually I just left it
I thought, you
know it's better for me for them to have
that sense of accomplishment
it's not
hurting anything
that's the look and
that is just the way it's gonna be and
I learned through that
it's organic that
was our saying
it's organic
I've had a lot of time to think about
what I want for my room but as I was
designing it, I realized it was a heart
shape
design can sometimes just happen
accidentally and I didn't intend to have
this this perfect third idea and it just
seemed that two hearts, one going
one way and one going the other way
came out that way
we're going down
one yardstick
this is gonna be the one
circle is gonna be three-foot lower than
the other circle
how's it going guys?
it's going beautiful
the dogs were such a ginormous
help
they moved dirt and moved sticks
if they
were able to actually get the dirt out
of the hole, that would be a lot more
productive rather than just moving it
from one place to another
he's watching
you dig and he goes, I can do that
gettin
deep
the root of our problems right there
Root-pert
[music]
we  cut out with the pressure washer,
then we break out the chunks
it worked
surprisingly well
[laughter]
I'm really bummed about that shovel though
that was your favorite?
yeah
this wimpy one will have to be my
favorite from now on
I'm gonna go put a
quick shield on it
it worked really good
I gotta try it now
[music]
we needed a couple
railroad ties so we looked online and
there were some people who wanted to get
rid of theirs
we went and helped them
dig them out, out of their property and if
you're willing to go and dig up some
railroad ties for someone then if it makes them happy it makes us happy
it's a deal
[drum music]
a lot of times we'll just be
able to bury our posts
when there long
enough
we have shorter posts
we got to add a
little extra so we can get them up in
the air
kisses
hugs
blah
you just want my bottle
that's what you want
first bag
[music]
we put together the foundation just
like typical
we do have some pretty nice
ground out here
we drop it in
two or three different rows down so we
get kind of a foundation that's placed
in and then we start building on top of
that and kind of gauging in where that
floor is gonna set
[music]
look at that
beautifully leveled pole
it's gorgeous
Bullet, look, I got a stick
ready - go get it
yes you've got that stick
it's just a process
do a layer
tamp it on
the top
tamp it on the side and so forth
[music]
one side or the other
Hi Dad
hey
no, no, no don't ruin it
these buildings are so organic
and just different
you don't really ever
know what they're gonna turn out like
until they're done
no matter how much
time I spend there looking at it and
planning, it doesn't turn out exactly what's in my head
but it's even better normally
I am a human stabilizer
are you growing your hair out?
[music]
there's gonna be a post in the center of
my bedroom
and I really didn't want it to be a
railroad tie
that's the beginning
Garen suggested we used some of the old
mesquite trunks that we have
they're real thick wood and I really like that
idea
dad has found our center post and
he's been working on that and getting
that ready
gonna be a little bit more
artistic
it's a shapely kind of a post
scraping it all down
there's a lot of
bugs so it's gonna take a little bit of
time to chase those worms out
you want to
look at this dad just double-check
your good at it
unless something is not right and you hate it because your roof won't fit
my roof doesn't matter there
ummm hummm
[music]
Shae and I, we headed over
to the hoop barn to see what windows
were available over there
I found these candy jars so we're gonna use those aren't we Shae?
yeah
those are definitely gonna work
yeah I've always
thought it would be cool to put
something in there
okay
little jars
it's nice to kind of map things out now
so that we know where everything's gonna
go
there's windows, hangers
we're gonna
do some bottle lights
I want them by my bed
[music]
before we start the day, we usually cut our
bags to length, lay the barbed wire and
then start
[music]
nice
It took quite a bit of work, doing some
sanding and taking down all these rough
edges and stuff but for the most part I
think I've got it shaped the way I
want shaped
one of the things we told the
kids was whoever got the first, which of
course the oldest, Bree, got the first
building
the benefit is is she gets the
building first but the benefits of the
last being Shae is that she will then
get hopefully, the best building because
we've learned from all the other
buildings
when I was designing this
one, I had a lot of time
I got to experience
everyone's building and seeing what they
like, what they don't like so I combined
what I liked about all the buildings
into mine
[music]
clearly, I was not made for
this job
ahhhh
okay, we're doing this differently now
so that they're
already
try this again
alright, what do you think of that snapple?
we have smaller
windows this time
the actual that wall sticks
out of the ground is a little shorter
than our usual buildings
it's dog level
Diesel
hi
except they'll be a window
oh my
gosh, you're gonna have all kinds of nose
windows
oh no
[music]
we're going with the two by
12 instead of a two by ten to try and
get a little bit wider of a window box
that way it covers more of the bag
[drum music]
Garen savage in his natural environment
it's
just four two by twelves and then just
squaring it up, nailing it together
nothing too complex
[drum music]
because the windows are smaller, I don't
think we're gonna brace them off
we may end up bracing them later depending on
how it goes
but I think for now, we're
just gonna set them on there and level them
[music]
today we're gonna go ahead and get the
posts installed
[drum music]
is this is gonna be a window?
yes siree
shoot
it's going to have a big window [German accent]
big big windows
big window
yes
[music]
hey, Shelly, where is this window going?
it's too tall now
and that roof slopes back
this is damp enough still
[music]
my room is gonna be boss
you know that's true
want to help me Bry?
[music]
alright
hey, it's not tamp-orary
[laughter]
I'm stabilizing it
so what are you up to?
right now we're putting the level of
the beam to set across the post
I like that
can you pull the post this way a little bit?
okay
that's a nice fit right there
you're not going to have this much stuff piled in here
you can't get to the bottom
I agree
so I guess we are going to put them in like this
it is beautiful
[music]
what's up
no
it's all dirty Mom
oh no, it's dirty
[music]
a little bit over
bagging up to it and then I think once
we get around here
then we'll take
the tire out right?
yeah, then we pull the tire out
it's just a frame
a tire mold
we saw
somebody doing that on YouTube didn't we?
we did
youtube
youtube for the win man
let's go take a peek at it
[music]
sit
I like it, wow
it has some issues
what's that for?
the beam going across here
crazy dogs
[drum music]
this is what happens every time we go to
record
they go crazy
it's like they want to take all the attention
from the camera
you are the instigator
the light still comes through
it
like if you stick your head in there
it's still lit
mom's experimenting [giggling]
you can see a little pinpoint
oh yeah, I see a little pinpoint
you guys look
ridiculous
we'll wait till it dries and then we'll
take off that tape
are you admiring my
beautiful handiwork
yes I am
I was admiring it
[sneaky music]
oh yeah, a dung beetle
dung beetles
[music]
I got your back Diesel
we have to stop
at this point in the building, we
have so many things going in
it's so
hard to keep track of it and it's
slowing us down really bad because
doing
prep work after prep work and we're not
can't just get in and bag which makes it
makes this part really slow and crazy
I'm getting the window boxes level and plumb
you're getting them plumb level
after the window frames nailed in, that whole
wall just gets tied together really
nicely
you notice a big difference after
the window frame is put in
[yell]
are you okay?
I found a stick bug
and he's so cute
look at him
I just feel like maybe we should
put him on the tree or something
he's
kind of panicky
hey dude
come here
there we go
he's going up
on a Tuesday
are
you ready
are you ready?
thank you Bree
thank you
I'll kiss it for good luck
that's what I'm talking about
that's true grit
here, it fell out of your head
oh, that fell out of my head again?
oh wait no, it's mine
alright, let's get this over with
you have to get his rolling shot or he
won't be able to sleep tonight
whoa
she did a good job on this, didn't she?
ya, she did a really good job
these babies go in here
they're like a mini window
let's do it
keep them all the same
okay
huh, that look good?
it looks like a kowawi wall
it's even got a smiley face
eyes, nose
it's a happy room
it is a happy room
[music]
is it moving at all?
this is boarding
whoa
the stakes are high
couldn't be any
lower because this is not coming out easily
you did it
this is a killer deal
we're
always looking ahead for deals on
building materials because every time we
can find something used, it just helps
cut on the cost of these buildings
tremendously and we don't typically find
wood but we did come across some 3/4
inch plywood
it's a little weathered but
it's in good condition
[drum music]
the wheelbarrow was just sitting right there
I just mixed it
dad stole it I bet
it's the same person
that steals our socks but only
the left ones
what's up with that?
now we have to go see because the mystery
must be solved
Gary do you have are wheelbarrow?
oh my gosh, he goes
you took our dirt
it's still there
It doesn't seem practical dad
I'm glad you didn't use the other wheelbarrow
because the other wheelbarrow was empty
thank you
it's missing
[music]
don't mind us dad, we'll just navigate around your bricks
they really hold everything down
you guys are so demanding
thank you for playing
aw, that is going to be so cute
this will be the outside
the bags going over the top of it
so cute
I love
that look
very cool
[music]
right now we're just
doing some cleat
minor cleat work
all
right Shae, so what's next on your agenda?
we have to put the
we're putting in the pot
thought you wanted to know that
it's got issues
it's special
that could be a problem
Ma, what are we gonna do with the hole?
we'll plug it with cement or something
oh, okay
gives you a whole new point of
view on walking on eggs
or nails
wait
no that's walking on eggshells
are you a little tired Bree?
I'm starting to get, you know
illusions from all the sun
[music]
Shae's gonna put the keys to her
Maserati in there
[singing] my Maserati
does 189
well, who knows,
maybe it goes a few miles more
[singing] I got pulled over and now I don't drive
close enough
[music]
all right, so we have the pot in and this
little hanger here is gonna be for
keys or who knows
it's just when you
first walk in that door, we got the light
switch right there
everything in one
spot
It is gonna be amazing
[drum music]
nice
oh, there he goes
whoa
no, no, no, no, no, no
ahhhh
are you okay Mom?
yeah
go live your life
live your dreams
hold this and make yourself useful
instead of ornamental
why don't you set it down somewhere
I did - I set it down in your hands
so hard to sit down right at his foot there
at her if I split there
we all have our flaws
he's ignoring you
I noticed
are you talking?
weza putting a cement arch around the window [German accent]
[music]
putting up to the board so we can have a  ceiling and a roof [German accent]
are you ready pops?
back to the drawing board
yeah back to the drawing board
yes silly
Garen put this one on
it's okay
I can't seem to get him going
he's a little tired
are you dropping these nails on the ground here for the tires to get pop-oled on
yeah
why else would you put nails on the ground
short on one end
hey
heads
[laughter]
I'm good
we're good
[music]
why don't you go ahead and nail that in
want me to square it first?
ya, square it
okay, we got her
[music]
[singing] there are dinasaurs in Gerasick park
Oh Garen, this looks so good
very pleased
[music]
so we went dumpster diving
dumpster
diving at Gram and Gramps
like bosses
it's like cutting my fingers
hazard
if you wanted it perfect, you could have done it
yourself
okay mom
I'm not lippy anymore
she can stop being lippy
mom piggy backs off of my bad
pun to create a bad pun herself
that's
family love right there
[music]
we're filling in between the
rafters now
filling in bags
we'll fill you in because we're filling this in
these rafters
I'm an endangered
species
we're all endangered species
there's only one of us
every single
person is a species to you
we're one
of a kind
Diesel dances with you
dance with me
yeah
a little vicious
once you guys got just even one bag in
between these joists, they just tightened
this floor up so much
amazing
a little bit longer bag this time Mom
okay
no more Swiss cocoa for you
Swedish fish
no Swedish meatballs
no Swedish tacos
wait
wait a minute
we don't have Swedish tacos
we are part Swedish so we can say that
you can say that
I don't have any Swede me
that comes from your mama's side
dad has been
working on his sarcasm
I don't believe
in sarcasm
does that mean your sarcasm
experience is not going very well?
there's no such thing as sarcasm
it's a filament of your in-gig-nation
the family
is really good at sarcasm
it's one of
the ways that they express humor and
it's so funny to see their reactions to
me practicing with this idea sarcasm
because well I'm not so good at it and
anyway I've been playing with this idea
and trying but it keeps coming
out snarky and, and I just don't have the
hang of it yet
I don't practice it anymore
you've quit it cold turkey?
I'm a cold turkey quitter
you were making vast
improvements
we were so impressed
people make fun of me
everybody keeps laughing at me for my
sarcasm but I think it's for the wrong
reasons
[music]
going this way
load her up
Hey, Mom do you want me to cut that?
did I not cut it right last time?
[giggles]
okay
not really
[laughter]
I was going to let you cut it because you looked like you wanted to cut it
wait a second, maybe there's a
reason he politely said that
alright, I can take a hint
especially when you tell me straight out
I don't
think we need it
really, it's gonna fit?
I never really had a learning curve
you had to teach yourself to glue
yeah, exactly
but you did awesome
yeah
it looks good up here Bry
you did good
awesome
[music]
we started at 6:00 a.m.
no, make that uhhhh
four
3:30
and now the sun is setting as you can clearly see
it feels
like the sun should be setting
no, I don't mean to
correct you though because I know you
know everything
I do know everything
thank you
let's see your little nose thing
yes, Mother
just want to look at it
want to tease me?
no
you want to mock my pain
I'm smiling but you cannot see it
[laughter]
your eyes
show it
[music]
two straight and then one setting
sort of like that
right there?
just put one on
[music]
do you want to get two sides set up?
then we'll just tip it up
and move it to where we want it
[music]
you'll live
woah! woah!
did you move it slightly more than a
touch and they freaked out Shae?
yah
Shae, can you grab the hammer and throw it at my face
yah, sure thing
sounds a little violent
that actually
holds itself up, doesn't it?
a little bit
hand me the level
let me level with you
this level is holding up this roof right now
[giggles]
hey, could somebody get the lad a
tape measure?
hey Bryson, can we have that
one now?
anywhere but here
alright, I'll take it to the other side of the property
now can we have it?
[laughter]
I did my duty
they are probably going to call on me in the next two minutes
Bryson
can you come over here?
a little bit, in little bursts,
very far apart
[music]
Oh here
because we need two and a half
inches up
that gives us a little wiggle room
that's five and a half for the two
by six
[music]
we have a new addition to the family
say "hi"
are you getting tired?
[music]
that is the most adorable thing I have ever seen
come meet your new family
hey, you
Hi Gizzy
so much personality
[music]
a little dirt blender
this is Gizbert
or Pug G
Pug G, the pugster
I knick named him Skahiggle Boody
when he walks his boody skwiggles
I see, I see
the skwiggle
when he skwiggle when he walks, he walks when he skwiggles
skwiggle walking
or Gizbert
for short
he's so sweet
hello
puny mortal
my, my how far down you are
I don't have a come back to that one
I wish I did
puny mortal
you're getting our good side peasant
the forehead?
where you're balding?
[giggles]
this mortal is wounded
alright Dad
I'm expecting great things from you
alright then
the second half of the
roof hangs over more
we didn't know exactly how it was gonna work out
we have two-by-six on the first half
where it's all shorter spans
now we're
gonna move to a two-by-eight for the
longer spans and we don't have any two-by-eights so we're gonna
stop for the day, go into town and get
some two-by-eights
[music]
go get 'em Max
grouchy old man
he is a grouchy old man
he's it totally "get off my lawn" kind of guy
if had had a lawn, he'd be screaming at people to get off it all the time
what are you guys up to?
making some stucco
got a one puppy over here
I got another puppy over here
he's like, "oh my gosh, you guys keep bringing
those things home
this is the fourth one
you guys need to stop!"
Rapunzel, Rapunzel
let down your hair
this I think is a pretty good batch
she's getting some water to wet down the walls
for connection
oh yeah, that is perfect
how good is your aim?
it's excellent
you say dribbling on my puppy
you got to get a pattern to this
I'm not sure who Pink is
she's a pop singer
hey now I'm still a rock star. I got my
rock moves and I don't need you [singing]
I love how you sing that like mom will
know what that song is
let's see, what's
another one?
"I'm coming out so you bet.."
yah, okay
she's funny
even wet this stuff is
better than the last stuff
what did we decide?
like a 2 to 1
2 to 1 ratio
[music]
we're ready to go?
ready to cut it, stick
it up
[music]
look it that
is that not the coolest
thing
perfect
my span was a bit more than what a
2x6 could handle so we went for 2x8
for three of the rafters
[music]
we're getting the windows installed here
this one looks
like it has a trim around it
am I upside down?
ut oh
I'm in upside down
[laugher]
okay, now press in the center
[music]
now it's time for trim
asuming I didn't put the window on backwards
that looks nice
oh, I love it with that
trim
cute, isn't it?
yeah
that gonna
hold you or are you gonna fall through?
yes
yes to if it is going to hold you or to you're going to fall through?
it's gonna hold me!
it's awesome
now you want me to gracefully come down
or just come down like normal?
just jump
[music]
he's eating the stucco, Mom
ut oh
[music]
thank you
now he's pulling oh your shirt
[growling]
[music]
your face is so dusty
oh my goodness
[music]
you're the reason for the crookedness in my roof [singing]
oh my gosh
I got it
alright, two down
eight to go?
that is solid enough
ish
I honestly thought carpenters put carpet in
that would be a logical thing to call carpenters
exactly
we have eight boards, all
sitting on each other and all supporting
each other
the more weight you put on
them, the tighter everything gets
it's a
little bit different
we've taken an
octagon in the middle and created kind
of a compression ring that we can attach
everything to
plus, we've also done the
lap over to get the idea of a reciprocal
roof
[music]
we'll cut the fascia
I mean at least it would of been longer
I got back from my little trip that I had
to take for a work and we had to do a
little bit of re-leveling for some of
the rafters
it's kind of a tricky thing
getting everything all level and the
proper distance away from the building
that's looking better
so that the roof
has the proper amount of hips that
set off at the top of this reciprocal roof
got it?
[music]
what are you covered in?
are you Sawdust Diesel?
that looks perfect coming down the center of this one
get your nail gun
right now
we're putting on the fascia for our roof
put your angle thing on that and see what that is
this side?
when you
do some type of octagon, it is tough
all
those angles are so different and then
you add the complexity of a reciprocal
roof which doesn't come out from the
center of the building, it comes out at
an angle
then you compound it even more
and then I cut it at a 14, if I would of cut it at 15 I would have been right
yes
I would agree
[music]
you got a little something on your face there Diesel
we're just bagging up
to this so it's flat
trying to make this
flat so that our sheeting will go up to it
and then that will kind of act like the
bird block that you would typically put
in a house
[cutting noise]
have you gotten rid of your nemesis?
now I'll hit it here
[laughter]
my head's caved in
let's see?
my wife wouldn't let me cut that branch off
[laugher]
you cut that branch off?
uuhhhh
Dad, that was my favorite part of the roof
oh well
[music]
there's one right underneath there
this is too short Dad, by about 2 inches
everything is so complicated on
bevels and angles and links, I was
constantly off
I had cut this thing like
two maybe three times to get it to
fit correctly
how did we get two inches off though?
I never make a two inch mistake
I cut it twice and it was
still too short
it's too short Dad
what?
again?
what am I doing?
I was
teasing Dad because he kept making the
wrong cuts and it was exactly an inch
and a half short, every time he cut it
an inch and a half
inch and a half?
what do you keep doing Dad?
I don't know
we'll just just throw a 2x4 in there
it's not going to show
if you don't want to do it the right way
that's between you and the roof
I think you guys have reversed roles
use your gun and pin a new one in
yah
[music]
that groan is important
I need a short one
are you ready?
let me lick it first
please do
it's almost a
full sheet for one area
very efficient
I was just like man
Papa's a beast
as long as it goes my way
I just hope this roof  stays together
I have complete confidence,
faith in the builders
doesn't sound
like you do Mom
I actually do
Oh, barb wire down
I got you
thank you Honey
[music]
it's a lot of fun to take a weird shape
and add a roof to it and make it look
like art
I'm really happy with the way
this thing is turning out
so Mom
yeah
why are we getting the sand here instead
of buying it?
we started using this stuff
out here until we could get to the sand
place because they weren't open
I think
it's got some clay content in it
it's
working so good that I don't know if we
want to go buy it now
here comes the
crew
they don't want to miss out
no they don't
like what y'all doing up in here?
you got
anything to eat?
[music]
you guys are obnoxious
do you know that?
the four pugstatiers
[music]
this is not good
success
yes
that's what talking
about
take note because that's a story of preserverance there
trying  to scare it in
it's a start
the window of opportunity
thank you very much
anytime, I'll be here all week
can I take your order please?
I'll take a hamburger, fries, a steak...
a steak?
what kind of fast food restaurant is this?
it's a fancy one
this is our makeshift window that we are going to put in here
I can't decide if I want it this way or this
I like the
other way
me too, it feels like the glass
is half-full
hello
so we're gonna cement it in
today
sweet
try building up the sides a little
bit
what side do we want there
I like
that
[music]
beautiful
so we have our dirt bike tire and our
glass end tabletop
we're ready to put it
all together
seal it up
make it look good
we're
ready to take this out and I want to
kick it free because that's how I feel
about it
kick it free Obi-Wan
I'm happy now
is it gonna hold?
I'm gonna say yes
if not, I'm in trouble
it looks like a hobbit hole
doesn't it?
about as small as a hobbit hole
it's so cute
it's the circle of life
there's no food
so he doesn't like it
he eats everything
whatever's edible
just lift it right up into
place and then wedge it in with shims
Dad did some adjustments to make sure
everything fits
I have it in backwards [whispers]
uuhhhh
bummmmmerrrrr
tap a roo
uuhhhh
that's not scary at all
I didn't think you'd be scared
so Dad, how
are you gonna secure the window in?
magic
the best form of securing things is
[music]
so this turned out really good
nice and solid
just perfect
we'll just clean it up and stick it in the hole
they're hooked into other
little wooden things
the window was a
little small for the hole so he got some
little wood to secure the window
[music]
use the wood to help connect
this is our first tire window we've ever
put in
never done a tire window before
I really like it
it looks so good
it's in there really pretty steady too
once the stucco gets in,
it really holds it very well
look how cute
that is
turned out really nice
[music]
we're putting in the threshold for the door which is gonna set the
grade of what we're gonna have for our
flooring
get him Gizzy
there we go
that's what I'm talking about
found some material here that I
can bend and use for a round
corner since we're doing rounds a lot
and make this a nice little step
here so that's the goal
[music]
he's got little ones
you want lots of little
ones?
it looks like that's what you are getting
[music]
I can hear the ocean
are you happy with that?
yes
for now?
how about now?
now?
is now good?
no
now that it's permanent, can we
move it?
you want to help us out?
give us a hand?
give us a paw?
hmm, I'm not happy with this
not happy Bob
not happy
Oh
why did you stick that there for?
because I figured we'd be putting more
blocks right there
you know where he's
gonna put glue in two seconds
why did you
put your hand in that for?
because you stuck it there
[music]
we realize he's annoying
he's enduring like that
huh Gizbert
look at that walk
he's got a
sassy walk
[music]
it makes for the funnest little room
all those windows on that
side and that downstairs
just fun
day one of the official cobbing of the inside
we did a batch here
I'm just trying to
smooth it out the best I can
make sure everything looks purty
Shae and I have been
working on this and she had to run off
and do a couple things
I have to say, it's really fun working with Shae
it seems like you have all
these opportunities to discuss things
it's kind of been our motto all through
the kid's lives is just to work
side by side with them and I think it
really pays off in our closeness and our
ability to just talk about whatever's on our heart
I recommend it
okay, in that case
[music]
we're digging a trench here
we're going to  fill it with concrete
make a footer out of it or
foundation piece
right now
we have our poles in and they're fun
they're all shaped and twisted and it's
a lot of fun
now it's time to move onto the
concrete phase
[music]
so cool
look at how pretty that is
the coolest
so far in this
building, we have stressed the flatness
of walls
who has stressed the flatness?
I have
thank you
and mom has put this
beautiful, pointy lump
[giggles]
with not a bulbous bag no, because that's unfixable
with the piece of wood
sticking out
right there
something we could of cut off
I'm fixing it
[music]
is it like a dream come true?
yes
what I'm wondering is if the wall is
flat enough for your majesty
it is not
we have a plan though don't we?
we do
it might actually hurt
[music]
looks so cool
like that one wall that needs to
be done
[music]
we've got all of these paints
I would rather use what I have then run
down and spend a hundred bucks on a
five-gallon bucket of paint
Shae likes these colors
you can make a maroon color
it's a combination of violet and
red which is really just a lot of red
and then maybe 25% blue
I'm going to see
what I have
I doubt I have any red paint
but I'm gonna take a look and see if I
can make a paint that's either close to
these or something that we at least can
live with
it's definitely a lighter
version of what I wanted
it's kind of a plum
I'll have to see what
Shae thinks of that color
Shae is going to have a pink room?
no
look it's not pink
it's purple
purple
this is dry
yeah, see it's purple
it's not pink
when we first started putting it
up on the wall, I was scared because it
looked like it was coming out
pink and I knew that that was the one
color that Shae did not want
I'm sorry
you think it's too pink?
I really, really don't want pink
it's a really nice kind of
purpley color
it's my tongue color
that'll be no doubt
that a chick lives here that's for
certain
don't look
don't look at it
Bullet, why don't you tell us what you've done?
I think you have a confession to make
Bullet, you can't drop your ball here
look at that
no no
what am I going to do with that?
I'll tell Bryson
it's his dog
yep
Bryson, you dog did something
you need to come clean it up
what did he do?
that
how do you feel
on the matter?
observe, his chin, pink
and earlier
I'm pretty sure I saw him eating
something that he shouldn't have been
eating
it is cool
it's really cool
oh I love it
do you love it?
yah
[music]
I like it
it's a little purple
it's a good purple though it's uh, it's good
it doesn't look pink at all
perfect for Shae's room
[music]
I'm making happy little trees
we're gonna put one...
oh that's daring
remember Bob Ross?
oh it
kind of matches this tree
that's hilarious
I think I'm done
my cold hands are done
I'm lovin it
alright, Shae
all right, I'm trying to
figure out what I want so we have this
which is finger painting
that's just the
little droplets or we can do something
like that
it all looks like smudges to me
hey now
what do you think Mom?
I'm thinking
that looks more cherry blossomish
do you think we should do this in the
background with a green?
I'm trusting in you Bree
it does, from a distance
you know, like when it is a dot
you zoom out enough
everything looks good
it's got character
oh Shae, I'm loving that
thanks
ba, ba, ba, ba, I'm loving it
[music]
what are you working on Garen?
roofing
sheeting
[music]
hey Skoobie, who can't get down once you've got up
are you going to come down?
no
I can't
I just sit up there and whine
are you sure you are suppose to be up here?
[music]
how is it looking?
I'm putting a layer one of the blossoms
looks like you got your hands full there
know that it's
also on the tip of my fingers
cute
time for a color change
and you can see
that there's more clusters around the
branch
so do you think that's good?
is that enough?
yeah, I think it's very cute
we'll see when it dries
what are you doing up here huh Scoobie Doo?
Hey, look what's going in
oh how exciting is that
they are getting closer huh Mom
it is
hi buddy
Gizbert's house is
almost finished
come on buddy
he's doing it
hi
he's learning
he did it
you're getting so good at that
[music]
I was like oh, okay
2 1/2 inches?
a couple different ways to
do the panel's
we have found that the
easiest way is just lay the panel in
place, nail it down
yeah there
that's probably good
and then trim it at the joints where
it meets and butts up to another one and
then we put the ridge cap over the top of that
then we can cut that corner
off it fits right there
yah, I think it will
[growling noise]
what was that?
like chill
little squirt
are you going
through your angry teenage years?
[music]
it works out pretty good
these land right on those ridges and covers up that
spot there
all the water runs down correctly
is my foot in the way Dad?
give me a nail quick
that has
got some cobwebs on it baby
we've had them for a while
we'll dust them off
look how cute that's gonna look Mom
yeah
gorgeous
this is the last of three doors that
he purchased on a Craigslist ad
Shae gets the last one
oh yeah we picked up
this frame for what?
five bucks for that frame
five bucks for the frame too
it's a metal frame
it actually fits the dimensions
we were going to be amazing and finish stucco-ing this
are you impressed?
we were
so optimistic at being able to get this
room done in the beginning of the week
oh yeah your room is definitely going to be done
we'll have it done soon
and we didn't get as much done
as we thought we'd be able to do but
Shae and I are gonna be extremely
happy to be done stucco-ing
whenever
that may be
is that what you said?
yeah
you're motivated to do nothing
I like it
wanted to share my genious with you
[music]
woooooo
put down 30 pound felt
put all the
flashing around it and then I use a six
inch seam called seam flashing and I
do all my seams
glue all that down
with this white snow roof
common out here in the southwest to have snow roofs
so we use that same material to glue all
this down
probably end up put three or
four coats
[music]
number two
got this first coat on
we're gonna put a couple more coats on I think
darken this up just a little bit more
[music]
we like to complete things within the
day or a week or possibly two
weeks but that's usually getting out
there for us so these projects being
such huge projects have really taught us
something very valuable and that is a
little bit everyday
stucco, even if you
do an hour a day, you may only put two
batches on the wall and that's only a
section so it takes a long time
and we find that within six months to a year
those big projects that seems so huge at
the beginning, get completed
we got some
sheetrock mud down at the local hardware
store
I'm gonna put it all over the
walls but you can already see it's way
smoother and then we'll sand it out and
then we'll put another coat on and then
this is just going to be as smooth as it
could possibly be
it's been really
a fun challenge
and flat walls -
I don't think we're really
gonna meet the goal of flat
[sad music]
oops
oh I was just talking about how fun it was
do we have more of those?
no
sad face
it just flew off the handle
get a handle on that mom
alright, I'll leave you guys
to handle this
[laughter]
[music]
Shae decided to go with the red oak
I'm putting that on
here now
Shae had to take off and take
Gizzy in to get him neutered
they should
be back here soon
[music]
Mr. Coneman
are you a little cone head?
[music]
whoops
weird isn't it
[music]
[puppy snorts]
it looks lumpy but those lumps
will all settle down
it did that on mine
when I did my roof
we had huge lumps
for whatever reason, it does that but
then in just a little bit, you give it a
week or so or whatever, and it will flatten
[music]
I think I can probably work with that
are you doing anything fun in here?
you guys are already working?
alright, I'll go get
dressed and come out
we're doing the soil cement floor
wooooo
[music]
Bryson, Bryson
[laughter]
it's so dusty
the dust is flying everywhere
I regularly dust it
[music]
I dust dry it
that's not too bad
[music]
it's kinda nice and soft
huh
here, put your hand down there
[music]
what are you doing?
there's some glue on there
I was fixing it
because that's just
what I do
[music]
oh yeah, very happy
that's goop
goopy on the sponge?
goopy on the sponge
let's just pick a spot we know
like this spot here
instead of trying to sand it all
in
we really try to think of things
outside the box when we work around here
we like to use those of building
materials which are traditional as well
as those which are alternative
[singing] it's a never ending job
I don't think it's that bad
it really isn't
it's pretty fast
we've been here three hours
wait, three
hours really?
I don't know, I'm making stuff up at this point
[music]
all right, got our paint
see if it works
out with the chair and look at that
perfect
I don't like this at all
you don't?
what?
no
that was not what I was expecting
I love all three of the colors but I
don't like them in that way
we can do it with section by section though
color that gray or yellow
purple, yellow, gray?
yeah
okay
let's do it
[music]
I think the blocking looks super cool
I just think it looks awesome
it actually
is a gradients in itself
a little bit because it's got the light here and then
it goes to this really bright yellow and
then the darker down in the smaller
it's cool
I love that
[music]
Bryson is starting on the ceiling
down there
we used laminate flooring in
my room
the first boards of goodness
we can use
laminate flooring for Shae's room
the first boards of boardish goodness
and the
insulation
the way we do this is just putting the floor in but reverse on
the ceiling and it's kind of weird but
it's basically the same thing as you put
in a laminate flooring
[music]
you just pop
in the boards
pop them up there
except the only thing different, is we use a
nail gun to nail it up
we also put
insulation up there for insulation
we're gonna be building the curb for the
skylight that's gonna be put up there
eight pieces
sixteen pieces actually to
cut here for a curb
it's about three and
a half inches tall
[music]
I'll be using this
flashing here to go around the edges to
keep the water out, give ourselves a
little more waterproofing in there and
this is easy
I need 8 of these
the flashing
here is gonna go down and eight pieces
all the way around and then once we have
it all down, we'll pin down the
corners and that'll give us our flashing
to keep water out
gotta make three rings with it so make
it last
and then I have a double stack
of two by sixes that'll go here for three
inches fixed for our curb
[music]
got Mr. Gizzy here and I'm attempting to
remove the tape on his head thing
are you okay Gizzy?
you okay in there?
just about free
ooooohhhhhh
dirt
ooh
feeda
that was gross Giz
oh you're sitting
waiting
he's waiting for his breakfast
this glass, I picked up at a garage sale
and the guy had like 50 of them that he
had sold over the course of time and he
said that the ones that had broken had
stayed together all in one piece so we
feel pretty confident that's a nice
piece of glass for up above
and the
glass is set right on top of the curb
it'll all be glued together
get the
hammer and bang a little bit
[music]
how you doing Shae?
I'm thinking
[music]
this is the sketch
so you & dad were able to find the right
stuff?
I hope so Bryson
let's take a look
set this up here
very delicately
dun
da-dun
oohhh
same color
so there is hope?
yes
[music]
in this room here, we went with the R-30
because we have 2x10 rafters that
go down here on the flat roof
over in this other area, though, we have a two by
sixes and needed to go with the R-19
on this upper roof, we're gonna use the
burlap so we can see her cool roof
design
I got this burlap at a garage sale for
free
you know what, that's gonna be wide
enough for right there isn't it?
are they all strips like that?
I can't believe it
the perfect size for this
oh yeah
nice
okay
so the plan is a work in progress
things have been so
crazy around here, we split up
and did some different things
Garen took on the interior stairs
Shae!
Hi
ice cream for breakfast, yummy
we build a little platform
here and then do you want your stairs going down this side or that side?
that side I think
that's some lightage there
he's
focused
he can't respond
betcha he can now
but he's choosing not to
what?
okay, there you go
[music]
something is wrong
that is not going to work
[music]
too cute
you're too cute to be in here
that's what it is
Garen doesn't want you to steal his spotlight
come on troublemakers, out you go
come on
[music]
wow
that thing is never falling
I wanted to see the shape of
the reciprocal roofing
a way that we can do it, is -
we've been taking burlap
and stapling it up between all of the
rafters so you can see all of the actual
main rafters there
to put
the burlap up there, is we just cut out
pieces, and they don't have to be precise
we just fold it under and put a staple
in it and boom the insulation it held
up there
what do you think Shae?
this looks so good
[music]
you're a little too fat huh?
no, you're too muscular that's what it is
ut oh
he made it through
[music]
that's awesome
hey, Pug G
[music]
this L bracket it's just from old bed
frames
we pick them up at garage sales
whenever we see them because they're so useful for building things
nine times out of ten, I find that you
can just go over to our hoop barn
we got a lot of building materials that we've
stored over time
you can walk over there
and find exactly what you need or
something that'll work and stuff always
turns out a whole lot cooler
just like this the staircase here
we were going to
go out and buy a bunch of two by twelves
which would have looked nice too but we were
able to go over there, find this nice oak
plank this just -
really turns out nice
can I step on it?
yep
be the first test
its creaking
it's going to stop as soon as we get the legs secure
that was scary
it's moving because it's not secured to anything yet
but welds are gonna hold up
look at that
it's all done
that looks amazing
is it gonna have any railing or no?
no, it's only a three foot drop so you're
just gonna break a hip or something if
you fall
[music]
I put this trim on
I'm not really a trim putter onner
but you can see
look how crooky it is
it's organic
if you hold your head crooked, it looks perfect
nice
oh yeah
love it
then when you make your first step up
a little high but not bad
those are light fixtures?
I mean whatever they are called
outlet covers
but look it's tan and white
because that is how cool we are
shhhhh, don't tell Shae
what?
[music]
oh yeah, perfect
why did you let the dog in?
[laughing] he's right in the way
ooh, we are backing up
[music]
how much clay do we
use?
better to have too much than too
little because it's gonna be a real bummer
to have to stop
the soil cement is kind of brittle so as you walk
on it, it's all broken up
you can see underneath, it's hard
we're sweeping it down to the hard stuff
so we can put the cob down
and then that will be the finished floor
this bottom came out nice
we'll clean it
awwww
it's just dust
noooooo
we've got our staging
areas all set up and gathered and now we
are getting ready to begin the process
of starting the floor so I have mixed
the first batch and they're just about
ready, I think, to start laying it down
let's do this
[music]
I would dry mix everything
you would wet
mix everything and pour
get the assembly line going
I'm mixing it dry
he's mixing it wet
we were inspired by
Henry Ford's assembly line in the making
of our assembly line
our dirt, mud, sand, cob and it worked really well
got the expert Levellers in there
getting the
floor down
[music]
you're doing great on the
ratios
they like it
okay, perfect
they are trying to keep up with these guys in here
and you guys are the expert levelers
Bree and Bryson have this thing where they
always think they can beat us and they
really can't in anything
wouldn't you like to skunk them?
I would
[music]
I think our assembly line idea worked really well
we got to a point where they couldn't keep up
we not only kept up with them, they had
to tell us to stop several times
are you happy with it Shae so far?
I am very
happy with it and I think that Pug G
wants to go down and play with Garen
ordinarily that job would have been the
slower job
you'd always be waiting on
mud to come in so that was why we were
very set on not only keeping up, but
beating them
and we're beating you and we
have the slower job
the floor did look
beautiful though
they must of taken extra time on it
because it really was
beautiful
Bree was amazing on how fast
she was working
lots of times she
was done before I was even there
she's not doing the hard part now is she
ah
ooooohhhhh
[laughter]
I'm just teasing
what?
that is not true at all
ah, you ruined the volcano we made
making volcanos?
yeah, cuz we got all this time on our hands
we got slow poke partners
am I waiting on them right now?
am I seriously waiting on them?
all that smack talk
what did I say about shoddy work
and then they think they can smack talk with us
that was a bad decision
again another mistake, they lost there too
just tallying up the score here and
right now we're looking at 2-0
and we've been talking what?
thirty Seconds
get your bucket
you guys need a bucket?
Gizzy's got a bucket for you
[music]
it makes it really fun when we are
working to make things into a little bit
of a rivalry, a competition
time goes by
faster when it's a game
because me and Bree win all the time
pound it
one
crushed it
us
awesome
we all get a participation trophy
but the
first-place trophy goes to me and Shae
there's actually another first-place
trophy that comes before you two
that's called a second place trophy
looks so good
what do you think?
it looks like a complete room in there doesn't it?
I've been far far away in a galaxy
unknown to other people except for other
people that live there and now it's time
to go take a look at the floor that everyone worked on while
I was away
[music]
that looks awesome
look at that
so cool
working on the location of my next one
thinking it out?
yeah
we have two
objectives for the patio railing
we want
it to be done quickly and inexpensive
we start with the old faithful, the scrap
pile, and lo and behold dad found
something he could use for the stairway
[music]
starting down here at the base
screw in
at the bottom with some screws
[music]
what's the hole right there for?
a big hole
it's to put your finger in it
it's like a dike
water comes splashing out of it
hey, Gary I got a light bulb for you
all right
that's so cute
that's epic Dad
oh yeah
[music]
we got
looking around in the animal area and we
found a whole bunch of pool fencing
it's free and it's here
so we're gonna give it a try
might as well
I like that height a lot
you and your 3d glasses
I think
they're fantastic eyewear
it's my
eye protection
we have to make a special cut in that one
we could not figure out those cuts
I don't know what was wrong
we couldn't figure it out
we start turning them around, we know we have to cut them at a
angle so they come in
we know the angles
like 22 and 1/2
yeah
where is that
special cut?
cuz it looks like it's gonna
fit to me
no matter what we do, it's
wrong
if Gary was here or Garen, they
seem to be able to visualize that
for some reason -
we got the two people who don't
visualize too well
that is the most painful thing I've
ever seen in my life
I don't have the strength
I just have to pin it and Bryson will save me
okay
one
more screw left and the drill battery
dies
[giggles]
we have all these gaps now so I'm going to
have to go through and patch them all up
why don't we just cut the chunk out
of the center
2.5 this way
and then
you flip it around
go to that same
measurement, 22.5 this way and it makes
this V
you cut that V out of the metal
here's the magic of these nice little
slits here
there's our angle
awesome
you got this
[music]
[ harp music]
it ties it all together so nicely going up and I think
it looks good
as a matter of fact, we like it
so well we're going to put it on Brysons
which I'm excited for
and it was quick
quick and easy to put up
I really like the security of that
it doesn't invade the space
I'm surprised
at how well I like the look of it
looks very nice
[music]
and so it begins
yep
[music]
I'm putting on the first coat
isn't it fun?
yeah it is
it uses the most - the
first one, you'll use like half that
bucket
all the coats after that take
less and less
shouldn't you do that far end first?
she's gonna trap herself in
she learned that from me
how many coats
did you get on it?
three on that one
this is the second coat
put some more on tomorrow huh?
yep yep yep
Gizzy wants in but we have a trap to keep him
out
yes, we're trapping you out cuz you're a
monkey
hey what y'all up to?
putting on the fifth coat
I love the shoes
these shoes are a new fashion
statement for anyone working on Earth
bags
they're all the trend
you really have that fashion in the bag
so do you see this table?
of course you
see this table
this is all the things
that we want to get done
it's right here
this is all of
our loose ends that we wish to -
all done
yes!
[music]
our $5 door frame didn't come with
weatherstripping?
no
it's just wrong
[music]
it looks gorgeous
of course
I only do the most professional
work
oh you do?
yeah
that's good to know
I don't get hired for a reason
you're hired
no, he said I don't get hired
[laughter]
I like it
[music]
that's fancy
is that going to go right there?
probably hang down a little bit huh?
yeah
Mom, I love that little light you got
it's so cute
[music]
don't these always just kind of look a little
unfinished?
we have an alternative
entrance
you know you're a redneck when...
[music]
does this go right up here?
yah
[music]
I really like the look of this
maybe just do like a small out thing
yeah
like a big cement step or even a
circle - a half circle
[music]
no!
oh my, my, my
[music]
it's done
it's completed and finished
dad peeping through the window behind us
there and the little brown, beautiful
window
this is my room and we've been
working for several months now to get
this place done
it has several really
cool features like our bottle window
which you can tell it's a bottle only if
you're looking like this
some artwork in
the process
still going, don't look at that
there's lots of little features to this
room that I really like
like this space
up here
oh yeah, like a plant would
work pretty good up there
our center
post
I love this post
[laughter]
I'm a meme now
these over the top
so they can all close
that is so cute
[music]
and up here is going to be my workspace
so I want to put my art stuff in this
section here
my computer and desk all in
that area
we have some amazing stairs that
Garen put together
he worked on this
really hard and then just came out
beautiful
so the lower circle is where
my bed, dresser, shelves here
I was thinking either books or who knows
here, I'm gonna have a door
oh wait, there is already a door
what do you know
I'm very
happy with it, yes
[music]
two things that were special about this
room
the sunken in circle and this
balcony deck type thing up here
a few chairs up here to sit and
watch the sunset
I was thinking about putting a bed up here and
then sleep out at night and be able to
see the stars
I absolutely love the wood, metal combo that
we did on the steps here
she just looks
beautiful
it's fun to walk down
it's fun to touch and everything
it's all shiney
shiney
the first step we
put in, is this cement
piece here and then I wanted a little bit
of a patio so we put in this little
swirly - it's just very fun
fun little patio
Gary I made a
commitment to get these rooms done for
the kids and I wanted to see it through
all the way to the end
I feel really
good now because we're done with that
commitment and finishing the commitment
was really important to me
I actually
feel a little sense of relief
now this last one's done
oh yes there's a
sense of relief
but there's also
that sense of - what's next?
[music]
Gizzy is excited to get a new home
our family moved from the city to the
country
thanks for taking part in our
adventure
behold evil caterpillar
lurking just lurking
look so innocent, you just
want to pet him
I have battle wounds
completely peppered in blisters
vicious, vicious caterpillars
it's been a month
and the caterpillars
have taken over
the entire courtyard
it's not safe up there anymore
I'm running out of
provisions
I think the best course of
action, is to try and blend in
I think they know it's me
they're falling from the trees
Oh gosh
their beautiful, furry flesh burns
there's no escape
here we go
three times in a row
we don't even need cans
you could just sit here shooting
dirt things
go go go go
no, no, no, bad idea
ready, here we go
no way
what have you got there?
what is it?
get it
get it Diesel
oh you got it off
they're everywhere
it was worth the trip
to go
I'm going to go in for the double dip
ewwww
I wouldn't even do that and it's my own ear
okay
woo
ewww
I grossed myself out
I got to go wash my hands
moving in will be a big, big, big
huge task
that is a big job
we had a name for our team
it's called B & B
and then I joined and it was B & BS
[laughter]
let's get close
okay
pretend like we like each other
we do
[music]